Refactor CUDA graph API: decompose cuda_graph_scope into full_iteration impl, inference scope, and per-layer capture modules (#4292)
NVIDIA/Megatron-LM: docs/user-guide/features/cuda_graph.md

<!---
   Copyright (c) 2022-2026, NVIDIA CORPORATION. All rights reserved.
   NVIDIA CORPORATION and its licensors retain all intellectual property
   and proprietary rights in and to this software, related documentation
   and any modifications thereto. Any use, reproduction, disclosure or
   distribution of this software or related documentation without an express
   license agreement from NVIDIA CORPORATION is strictly prohibited.
-->

# CUDA Graph

CUDA Graphs reduce kernel-launch overhead by recording GPU operations once and replaying the recording on subsequent iterations. Megatron-LM provides three CUDA graph implementations controlled by `--cuda-graph-impl`.

For implementation background and design details, see NVIDIA's
[Transformer Engine and Megatron-LM CUDA Graph Support](https://docs.nvidia.com/dl-cuda-graph/torch-cuda-graph/te-megatron-cuda-graphs.html).
That article is a useful conceptual reference, but some examples there still use older flags such as

> `--enable-cuda-graph` or `--cuda-graph-modules full_iteration`; in this repository, prefer

Reviewer: nit, if we're talking about backward compatibility, the old flag was `--cuda-graph-scope`
```suggestion
That article is a useful conceptual reference, but some examples there still use older flags such as
`--enable-cuda-graph` or `--cuda-graph-scope full_iteration`; in this repository, prefer
```

`--cuda-graph-impl local|transformer_engine|full_iteration` as documented below.

## Overview

> | Implementation | Flag | Granularity | Use case |

Reviewer: Can we split this overview table into training and inference? This is currently correct for training but in inference we support `--inference-cuda-graph-scope=block` as well which is not per-layer as stated here.

Reviewer: e.g. here's an example generated version which is clearer / more correct imo, and also puts all the options for the flags upfront: 

```
  ## Overview

  CUDA graph behavior is set by three orthogonal flags:

  | Flag | Values | Purpose |
  |---|---|---|
  | `--cuda-graph-impl` | `none` / `local` / `transformer_engine` / `full_iteration` | Which capture backend / strategy |
  | `--cuda-graph-modules` | `attn` / `mlp` / `moe` / `moe_router` / `moe_preprocess` / `mamba` (multi-valued) | Per-layer capture coverage; only meaningful for `local` and `transformer_engine` during training |
  | `--inference-cuda-graph-scope` | `none` / `layer` / `block` | Granularity of CUDA graphs *during inference*; only `local` supports non-`none` values |

  Supported combinations:

  | `--cuda-graph-impl` | Backend | Training capture | Inference capture |
  |---|---|---|---|
  | `none` | — | off | off |
  | `local` | MCore `CudaGraphManager` | per-layer (controlled by `--cuda-graph-modules`) | `layer` (default) or `block` |
  | `transformer_engine` | TE `make_graphed_callables()` | per-layer (controlled by `--cuda-graph-modules`) | not supported (`none` only) |
  | `full_iteration` | MCore `FullCudaGraphWrapper` | one graph per training iteration; `--cuda-graph-modules` must be empty | not supported (`none` only) |
```

|---|---|---|---|
| Per-layer (local) | `--cuda-graph-impl local` | Per-layer | Automatic MCore `CudaGraphManager` backend |
| Per-layer (TE) | `--cuda-graph-impl transformer_engine` | Per-layer | Per-layer TE-backed implementation using `make_graphed_callables()` |
| Full-iteration | `--cuda-graph-impl full_iteration` | Entire training iteration (excluding optimizer) | Training / validation; maximum overhead reduction |

Think of the configuration in two layers:

- `--cuda-graph-impl` selects the implementation family.

> - `--cuda-graph-modules` refines coverage within the per-layer families (`local` and `transformer_engine`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `--cuda-graph-modules` defines exactly which modules should be graphed within the per-layer families (`local` and `transformer_engine`).
```

`local` and `transformer_engine` differ mainly in backend implementation and feature compatibility,
not in the user-facing per-layer capture model. The only mode with a fundamentally different
granularity is `full_iteration`.

---

## Per-Layer CUDA Graph — Local Implementation (`--cuda-graph-impl local`)

Uses MCore's built-in `CudaGraphManager`. Like `transformer_engine`, this is a per-layer mode:
leaving `--cuda-graph-modules` unset captures the whole Transformer layer, while specifying

> modules restricts capture to selected sub-regions.

Reviewer: This is true for training but not inference. For inference, local + `inference-cuda-graph-scope=block` attaches the CudaGraphManager at the block level and skips per-layer managers entirely. We should change both the title of this section and this description to reflect.

Operationally, this path is tightly integrated into MCore itself:

- graphable modules create and own their `CudaGraphManager` instances automatically
- the stock training schedules drive warmup/capture/replay automatically
- users typically select the mode through config flags only; there is no separate helper API to

>   wire into a custom training loop

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operationally, this path is tightly integrated into MCore training and inference:

- graphable modules create and own their `CudaGraphManager` instances automatically
- the existing training schedules drive warmup/capture/replay automatically
- users select the mode through config flags only; there is no separate helper API to
  wire into a custom training loop or a separate need to handle static input buffers
```

**Example — MoE model, capture attention and router:**
```bash
--cuda-graph-impl local \
# Optionally restrict captured modules (default: capture whole layer, but not working for MoE dynamic shapes)
--cuda-graph-modules attn moe_router moe_preprocess
```

---

## Per-Layer CUDA Graph — Transformer Engine Implementation (`--cuda-graph-impl transformer_engine`)

Uses Transformer Engine's `make_graphed_callables()` path. In Megatron-LM's CLI, this has the
same user-visible granularity as `local`: leaving `--cuda-graph-modules` unset captures the whole
Transformer layer, while specifying modules restricts capture to selected sub-regions. The main difference from
`local` is the backend implementation and feature compatibility, not the capture granularity.

Compared to `local`, this path exposes a more general and self-contained API via TE's
`make_graphed_callables()`, giving users greater flexibility and control over how CUDA graphs are
wired into custom training loops. The trade-off is that it requires more manual setup:

- the training loop must instantiate `TECudaGraphHelper`
- the training loop must call helper methods such as `create_cudagraphs()` and

>   `cuda_graph_set_manual_hooks()` at the correct points

Reviewer: I'd also note that this path does not do the static input buffer checking that the local path does to ensure that inputs get fixed memory addresses out of the box.

Author: I think `TECudaGraphHelper` makes this checking too?

Megatron-LM's stock training loop already wires these calls in `megatron/training/training.py`,
but custom training scripts must do the same work themselves.

### Usage

```bash
--cuda-graph-impl transformer_engine \
--cuda-graph-modules attn moe_router moe_preprocess
```

The same `--cuda-graph-modules` options apply as for `local`, and the default is likewise
whole-layer capture when the flag is omitted.

---

> ## Full-Iteration CUDA Graph (`--cuda-graph-impl full_iteration`)

Reviewer: Specify that this is training, and/or bring the equivalent inference flow into this section
